+++
title = "What is a monad again?"
date = "2026-03-03"
+++

I keep being confused about what a monad is.
I have previously convinced myself that I understand, but the feeling of understanding doesn't seem
to last very long.
So I thought I'd just write it down here in a way that is easy for me to understand should I get
confused again in the future.

Monads are a mathematical thing defined in terms of operations and properties that need to hold.
Haskell and some other languages have typesystems advanced enough to specify a monad as construct
in the language.
While other languages don't necessarily have sufficiently advanced typesystems to be able to
represent a monad as an interface you can implement, any combination of a type and functions that
satisfy the right properties is still a monad.

In Haskell the `Monad` typeclass looks like this:

```haskell
class Monad m where
  (>>=)  :: m a -> (  a -> m b) -> m b
  (>>)   :: m a ->  m b         -> m b
  return ::   a                 -> m a
```

If you're like me this looks like absolute gibberish, so let's decode it a little bit.
`>>=`, `>>` and `return` are functions.
`>>=` is called bind and `>>` is sometimes called then.

`>>` is just a shortcut for `>>=` with a value instead of a function for when `m b` doesn't depend
on `a`.
We'll call it `then` for now.

With that sorted out, let's transform this typeclass definition into a pseudo syntax that a
curly-bracket-brained person like me can read more easily:

```gleam
class Monad m {
  fn bind(m<a>, fn(a) -> m<b>) -> m<b>;
  fn then(m<a>, m<b>) -> m<b>;
  fn return(a) -> m<a>;
}
```

There are also rules associated with this interface: <https://wiki.haskell.org/index.php?title=Monad_laws>.

Let's translate these to our pseudo-syntax as well:

Left identity: `bind(return(a), h) == h(a)`  
Right identity: `bind(m, return) == m`  
Associativity: `bind(bind(m, g), h) == bind(m, fn(x) -> bind(g(x), h))`

